README.md, before:

### API Core

Lightweight framework for building dynamic multi-level APIs for any provider (Express, socket.io, etc.), consumable via multiple channels (HTTP, socket.io, etc.)

[![GitHub license](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue.svg)](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ajuhos/api-core/master/LICENSE)
[![GitHub issues](https://img.shields.io/github/issues/ajuhos/api-core.svg)](https://github.com/ajuhos/api-core/issues)
[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/ajuhos/api-core.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/ajuhos/api-core)
[![Coverage Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/github/ajuhos/api-core/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://coveralls.io/github/ajuhos/api-core?branch=master)
[![Codacy Badge](https://api.codacy.com/project/badge/Grade/4b1dd6ebe9eb4634aef02811c374efaf)](https://www.codacy.com/app/ajuhos/api-core?utm_source=github.com&amp;utm_medium=referral&amp;utm_content=ajuhos/api-core&amp;utm_campaign=Badge_Grade)

## Features

 - Dynamic model-based API routes
 - Extensible API queries with pre- and post-query steps  (coming soon)
     - Transformations (via api-core-mapper or your own library)
     - Authentication, ACL (via node-acl, passport, etc.)
 - Multi level API routes (eg. /schools/42/students/3/courses)
 - Multi channel APIs (eg. consuming HTTP and socket.io via api-provider packages)
 - Multi database APIs (different database for every route, if you need)
 - Versioned APIs

## Installation

**API Core is in ``alpha`` and NOT ready for production use.**

To install the latest version, use NPM:

```bash
$ npm install api-core
```

## Basics

#### API Edges

In API Core every API is built from edges. 
An edge defines operations and relations of a Data Model.

Every edge provides the following operations:

 - List entries (eg. GET /students)
 - Get an entry (eg. GET /students/3)
 - Create an entry (eg. POST /students)
 - Replace/Update an entry (eg. PUT /students/3)
 - Edit an entry (eg. PATCH /students/3)
 - Remove an entry (eg. DELETE /students/3)
 - Access to operations of one-to-one relations (eg. GET /students/3/class)
 - Access to operations of one-to-many relations (eg. GET /schools/42/students/3/courses) 
 - Access to custom operations (eg. PUT /students/3/rename)

Every operation provides standard features like filtering, sorting, 
population and pagination.

**Also every operation is available via all enabled channels.**

So while you can list students via a HTTP request, you also can do the 
same via a socket.io message or any custom channel defined by you.

#### API Providers

You can use API Providers to make your API consumable via different
channels.

We have (or working on) providers for the following channels:
 
 - HTTP
     - _Express: api-provider-express (coming soon)_
     - _Koa: api-provider-koa (coming soon)_
     - _Restify: api-provder-restify (coming soon)_
     - Ellipse: [api-provider-ellipse](https://github.com/ajuhos/api-provider-ellipse)
 - Socket
     - _socket.io: api-provider-socket.io (coming soon)_
     
Also you can implement your own API provider.

#### Data Models

Every API requires a set of data models. As with API Providers, you have
a bunch of options when choosing your library for creating the models.

We have (or working on) data model libraries for the following frameworks:

  - MongoDB: [api-model-mongoose](https://github.com/ajuhos/api-model-mongoose)
  - _MySQL_
  - ...
  
Also you can implement your own API model library.

## Usage

We have two working examples in the following repository, one with a 
local in-memory model (master branch) and one with a Mongoose model (mongodb branch).

Working Demo: [api-demo](https://github.com/ajuhos/api-demo)

**A complete API with 5 models and relations in 77 lines:**
```typescript
import {ApiEdgeError, OneToOneRelation, OneToManyRelation, ApiEdgeQueryResponse, Api} from "api-core";
import {MongooseModelFactory} from "api-model-mongoose";
import {EllipseApiRouter} from "api-provider-ellipse";
import * as mongoose from "mongoose";

const Ellipse = require('ellipse'),
      app = new Ellipse;

mongoose.Promise = global.Promise;
mongoose.connect("mongodb://localhost/api-demo");

const studentEdge =
          MongooseModelFactory.createModel("student", "students", {
              id: String,
              firstName: String,
              lastName: String,
              email: String,
              phone: String,
              schoolId: mongoose.Schema.Types.ObjectId,
              classId: mongoose.Schema.Types.ObjectId
          }),
      classEdge =
          MongooseModelFactory.createModel("class", "classes", {
              id: String,
              name: String,
              semester: String,
              room: String,
              schoolId: mongoose.Schema.Types.ObjectId
          }),
      courseEdge =
          MongooseModelFactory.createModel("course", "courses", {
              id: String,
              name: String,
              classId: mongoose.Schema.Types.ObjectId,
              courseTypeId: mongoose.Schema.Types.ObjectId
          }),
      courseTypeEdge =
          MongooseModelFactory.createModel("courseType", "courseTypes", {
              id: String,
              name: String
          }),
      schoolEdge =
          MongooseModelFactory.createModel("school", "schools", {
              id: String,
              name: String,
              address: String,
              phone: String
          });

const api10
    = new Api('1.0')
        .edge(studentEdge);

const api11
    = new Api('1.1')
        .edge(studentEdge)
        .edge(classEdge)
        .edge(courseEdge)
        .edge(courseTypeEdge)
        .edge(schoolEdge)
        .relation(new OneToOneRelation(courseEdge, courseTypeEdge))
        .relation(new OneToManyRelation(courseTypeEdge, courseEdge))
        .relation(new OneToManyRelation(studentEdge, courseEdge))
        .relation(new OneToOneRelation(studentEdge, classEdge))
        .relation(new OneToOneRelation(studentEdge, schoolEdge))
        .relation(new OneToOneRelation(classEdge, schoolEdge))
        .relation(new OneToOneRelation(courseEdge, classEdge))
        .relation(new OneToManyRelation(classEdge, studentEdge))
        .relation(new OneToManyRelation(classEdge, courseEdge))
        .relation(new OneToManyRelation(schoolEdge, studentEdge))
        .relation(new OneToManyRelation(schoolEdge, classEdge));

app.use(require('body-parser').json());

const router = new EllipseApiRouter(api11, api10);
router.apply(app);

app.listen(8080);
```

## Tests

We maintain high test coverage to provide a reliable framework 
for your APIs.

To run tests, execute the following NPM commands:

```bash
$ npm install
$ npm test
```

## License

The [MIT License](https://github.com/ajuhos/api-core/blob/master/LICENSE). Free forever. :)

Commit message:

Update package and readme
Updates to readme:
 - Add reference to api-core-mapper and state Swagger compatibility
 - Add reference to api-provider-express

README.md, after:

### API Core

Lightweight framework for building dynamic multi-level APIs for any provider (Express, socket.io, etc.), consumable via multiple channels (HTTP, socket.io, etc.)

[![GitHub license](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue.svg)](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ajuhos/api-core/master/LICENSE)
[![GitHub issues](https://img.shields.io/github/issues/ajuhos/api-core.svg)](https://github.com/ajuhos/api-core/issues)
[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/ajuhos/api-core.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/ajuhos/api-core)
[![Coverage Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/github/ajuhos/api-core/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://coveralls.io/github/ajuhos/api-core?branch=master)
[![Codacy Badge](https://api.codacy.com/project/badge/Grade/4b1dd6ebe9eb4634aef02811c374efaf)](https://www.codacy.com/app/ajuhos/api-core?utm_source=github.com&amp;utm_medium=referral&amp;utm_content=ajuhos/api-core&amp;utm_campaign=Badge_Grade)

## Features

 - Dynamic model-based API routes
 - Extensible API queries with pre- and post-query steps  (coming soon)
     - Transformations (via api-core-mapper or your own library)
     - Authentication, ACL (via node-acl, passport, etc.)
 - Multi level API routes (eg. /schools/42/students/3/courses)
 - Multi channel APIs (eg. consuming HTTP and socket.io via api-provider packages)
 - Multi database APIs (different database for every route, if you need)
 - Versioned APIs
 - Swagger compatibility (via [api-core-mapper](https://github.com/ajuhos/api-core-mapper))

## Installation

**API Core is in ``beta`` and NOT ready for production use.**

To install the latest version, use NPM:

```bash
$ npm install api-core
```

## Basics

#### API Edges

In API Core every API is built from edges. 
An edge defines operations and relations of a Data Model.

Every edge provides the following operations:

 - List entries (eg. GET /students)
 - Get an entry (eg. GET /students/3)
 - Create an entry (eg. POST /students)
 - Replace/Update an entry (eg. PUT /students/3)
 - Edit an entry (eg. PATCH /students/3)
 - Remove an entry (eg. DELETE /students/3)
 - Access to operations of one-to-one relations (eg. GET /students/3/class)
 - Access to operations of one-to-many relations (eg. GET /schools/42/students/3/courses) 
 - Access to custom operations (eg. PUT /students/3/rename)

Every operation provides standard features like filtering, sorting, 
population and pagination.

**Also every operation is available via all enabled channels.**

So while you can list students via a HTTP request, you also can do the 
same via a socket.io message or any custom channel defined by you.

#### API Providers

You can use API Providers to make your API consumable via different
channels.

We have (or working on) providers for the following channels:
 
 - HTTP
     - Express: [api-provider-express](https://github.com/ajuhos/api-provider-express)
     - _Koa: api-provider-koa (coming soon)_
     - _Restify: api-provder-restify (coming soon)_
     - Ellipse: [api-provider-ellipse](https://github.com/ajuhos/api-provider-ellipse)
 - Socket
     - _socket.io: api-provider-socket.io (coming soon)_
     
Also you can implement your own API provider.

#### Data Models

Every API requires a set of data models. As with API Providers, you have
a bunch of options when choosing your library for creating the models.

We have (or working on) data model libraries for the following frameworks:

  - MongoDB: [api-model-mongoose](https://github.com/ajuhos/api-model-mongoose)
  - _MySQL_
  - ...
  
Also you can implement your own API model library.

## Usage

We have two working examples in the following repository, one with a 
local in-memory model (master branch) and one with a Mongoose model (mongodb branch).

Working Demo: [api-demo](https://github.com/ajuhos/api-demo)

**A complete API with 5 models and relations in 77 lines:**
```typescript
import {ApiEdgeError, OneToOneRelation, OneToManyRelation, ApiEdgeQueryResponse, Api} from "api-core";
import {MongooseModelFactory} from "api-model-mongoose";
import {EllipseApiRouter} from "api-provider-ellipse";
import * as mongoose from "mongoose";

const Ellipse = require('ellipse'),
      app = new Ellipse;

mongoose.Promise = global.Promise;
mongoose.connect("mongodb://localhost/api-demo");

const studentEdge =
          MongooseModelFactory.createModel("student", "students", {
              id: String,
              firstName: String,
              lastName: String,
              email: String,
              phone: String,
              schoolId: mongoose.Schema.Types.ObjectId,
              classId: mongoose.Schema.Types.ObjectId
          }),
      classEdge =
          MongooseModelFactory.createModel("class", "classes", {
              id: String,
              name: String,
              semester: String,
              room: String,
              schoolId: mongoose.Schema.Types.ObjectId
          }),
      courseEdge =
          MongooseModelFactory.createModel("course", "courses", {
              id: String,
              name: String,
              classId: mongoose.Schema.Types.ObjectId,
              courseTypeId: mongoose.Schema.Types.ObjectId
          }),
      courseTypeEdge =
          MongooseModelFactory.createModel("courseType", "courseTypes", {
              id: String,
              name: String
          }),
      schoolEdge =
          MongooseModelFactory.createModel("school", "schools", {
              id: String,
              name: String,
              address: String,
              phone: String
          });

const api10
    = new Api('1.0')
        .edge(studentEdge);

const api11
    = new Api('1.1')
        .edge(studentEdge)
        .edge(classEdge)
        .edge(courseEdge)
        .edge(courseTypeEdge)
        .edge(schoolEdge)
        .relation(new OneToOneRelation(courseEdge, courseTypeEdge))
        .relation(new OneToManyRelation(courseTypeEdge, courseEdge))
        .relation(new OneToManyRelation(studentEdge, courseEdge))
        .relation(new OneToOneRelation(studentEdge, classEdge))
        .relation(new OneToOneRelation(studentEdge, schoolEdge))
        .relation(new OneToOneRelation(classEdge, schoolEdge))
        .relation(new OneToOneRelation(courseEdge, classEdge))
        .relation(new OneToManyRelation(classEdge, studentEdge))
        .relation(new OneToManyRelation(classEdge, courseEdge))
        .relation(new OneToManyRelation(schoolEdge, studentEdge))
        .relation(new OneToManyRelation(schoolEdge, classEdge));

app.use(require('body-parser').json());

const router = new EllipseApiRouter(api11, api10);
router.apply(app);

app.listen(8080);
```

## Tests

We maintain high test coverage to provide a reliable framework 
for your APIs.

To run tests, execute the following NPM commands:

```bash
$ npm install
$ npm test
```

## License

The [MIT License](https://github.com/ajuhos/api-core/blob/master/LICENSE). Free forever. :)
